Refine get-started.md (#1499)
pingcap/docs-tidb-operator: en/get-started.md

This section describes two different ways to create a simple Kubernetes cluster, and then you can use TiDB Operator to deploy a TiDB cluster on it. Choose whichever best matches your environment.

- [Use kind](#create-a-kubernetes-cluster-using-kind) to deploy a Kubernetes cluster in Docker. It is a common and recommended way.
- [Use minikube](#create-a-kubernetes-cluster-using-minikube) to deploy a Kubernetes cluster running locally in a VM.

Alternatively, you can deploy a Kubernetes cluster in Google Kubernetes Engine in Google Cloud Platform using the [Google Cloud Shell](https://console.cloud.google.com/cloudshell/open?cloudshell_git_repo=https://github.com/pingcap/docs-tidb-operator&cloudshell_tutorial=en/deploy-tidb-from-kubernetes-gke.md).

<SimpleTab>
<div label="kind">

### Create a Kubernetes cluster using kind

This section shows how to deploy a Kubernetes cluster using [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/).

kind is a popular tool for running local Kubernetes clusters using Docker containers as cluster nodes. See [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/kindest/node/tags) to see available tags. The latest version of kind is used by default.

> > **Warning:**
> >

Author: ```suggestion
```

> > The kind cluster is for test purposes only. **Do not use it** in production environments.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> **Warning:**
>
> This document is for demonstration purposes only. **Do not** follow it in production environments. For production environments, see the instructions in [See also](#see-also).

These are the steps this document follows:

> 1. [Step 1: Create a Kubernetes test cluster](#step-1-create-a-kubernetes-test-cluster)
> 2. [Step 2: Deploy TiDB Operator](#step-2-deploy-tidb-operator)
> 3. [Step 3: Deploy a TiDB cluster and its monitoring services](#step-3-deploy-a-tidb-cluster-and-its-monitoring-services)
> 4. [Step 4: Connect to a TiDB cluster](#step-4-connect-to-tidb)
> 5. [Step 5: Upgrade a TiDB cluster](#step-5-upgrade-a-tidb-cluster)
> 6. [Step 6: Destroy the TiDB cluster and the Kubernetes cluster](#step-6-destroy-the-tidb-cluster-and-the-kubernetes-cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Step 1: Create a Kubernetes test cluster](#step-1-create-a-kubernetes-test-cluster)
[Step 2: Deploy TiDB Operator](#step-2-deploy-tidb-operator)
[Step 3: Deploy a TiDB cluster and its monitoring services](#step-3-deploy-a-tidb-cluster-and-its-monitoring-services)
[Step 4: Connect to a TiDB cluster](#step-4-connect-to-tidb)
[Step 5: Upgrade a TiDB cluster](#step-5-upgrade-a-tidb-cluster)
[Step 6: Destroy the TiDB cluster and the Kubernetes cluster](#step-6-destroy-the-tidb-cluster-and-the-kubernetes-cluster)
```
预览效果看，去掉前面的数字，保留步骤 [数字]会好一些。

Author: 先和中文保持一致吧。

## Step 1: Create a Kubernetes test cluster

This section covers two different ways to create a simple Kubernetes cluster that can be used to test a TiDB cluster running under TiDB Operator. Choose whichever best matches your environment or experience level.

- [Using kind](#create-a-kubernetes-cluster-using-kind) (Kubernetes in Docker)
- [Using minikube](#create-a-kubernetes-cluster-using-minikube) (Kubernetes running locally in a VM)

You can alternatively deploy a Kubernetes cluster in Google Kubernetes Engine in Google Cloud Platform using the [Google Cloud Shell](https://console.cloud.google.com/cloudshell/open?cloudshell_git_repo=https://github.com/pingcap/docs-tidb-operator&cloudshell_tutorial=en/deploy-tidb-from-kubernetes-gke.md).

<SimpleTab>
<div label="Kind">

> ### Create a Kubernetes cluster using kind

Reviewer: 下面关于 kind 的描述，中文版本做了优化，英文好像还是以前的版本，需要修改一致。

Author: 嗯 会尽快同步的

kubectl cluster-info
```

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Expected output</font></summary>
<pre><code>
Kubernetes master is running at https://127.0.0.1:51026
KubeDNS is running at https://127.0.0.1:51026/api/v1/namespaces/kube-system/services/kube-dns:dns/proxy

To further debug and diagnose cluster problems, use 'kubectl cluster-info dump'.
</code></pre>
</details>

You are now ready to deploy TiDB Operator.

</div>

<div label="minikube">

### Create a Kubernetes cluster using minikube

[minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) can start a local Kubernetes cluster inside a VM on your computer. It supports macOS, Linux, and Windows.

> **Note:**
>
> Although minikube supports `--vm-driver=none` that uses host Docker instead of VM, it is not fully tested with TiDB Operator and might not work. If you want to try TiDB Operator on a system without virtualization support (for example, on a VPS), you might consider using [kind](#create-a-kubernetes-cluster-using-kind) instead.

> #### Prerequisites

Author: ```suggestion
```

> #### Prerequisites

Author: OK删掉吧

🏄  Done! kubectl is now configured to use "minikube"
```

> </details>

Reviewer: 这部分中文漏了：
#### 使用 gcr.io mirror 仓库启动 Kubernetes 集群

中国大陆用户可以使用国内 gcr.io mirror 仓库，例如 `registry.cn-hangzhou.aliyuncs.com/google_containers`。

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
minikube start --image-repository registry.cn-hangzhou.aliyuncs.com/google_containers
```

Author: 故意删掉的。这部分只适合国内用户，所以只在中文中保留了。

#### Use `kubectl` to interact with the cluster

To interact with the cluster, you can use `kubectl`, which is included as a sub-command in `minikube`. To make the `kubectl` command available, you can either add the following alias definition command to your shell profile, or run the following alias definition command after opening a new shell.

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```
alias kubectl='minikube kubectl --'
```

> Run this command to check the status of Kubernetes and make sure `kubectl` can connect to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command to check the status of Kubernetes and ensure that `kubectl` can connect to it:
```

🏄  Done! kubectl is now configured to use "minikube"
```

</details>

> #### Use a local gcr.io mirror

Reviewer 2: This can be removed from the English doc?

To further debug and diagnose cluster problems, use 'kubectl cluster-info dump'.
```

</details>

You are now ready to deploy TiDB Operator.

</div>
</SimpleTab>

## Step 2. Deploy TiDB Operator

You need to install TiDB Operator CRDs first, and then install TiDB Operator.

### Install TiDB Operator CRDs

TiDB Operator includes a number of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that implement different components of the TiDB cluster.

> Run this command to install the CRDs into your cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command to install the CRDs into your cluster:
```

customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/tidbclusterautoscalers.pingcap.com created
```

</details>

> **Note:**
>

> > For Kubernetes earlier than 1.16, only v1beta1 CRD is supported, so you need to change `crd.yaml` in the above command to `crd_v1beta1.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For Kubernetes earlier than 1.16, only v1beta1 CRD is supported. Therefore, you need to change `crd.yaml` in the preceding command to `crd_v1beta1.yaml`.
```

    kubectl -n tidb-cluster apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/examples/basic/tidb-cluster.yaml
```

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Expected output</font></summary>

```
namespace/tidb-cluster created
tidbcluster.pingcap.com/basic created
```

</details>

> If you need to deploy a TiDB cluster on ARM64 machines, refer to [Deploy a TiDB Cluster on ARM64 Machines](deploy-cluster-on-arm64.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to deploy a TiDB cluster on an ARM64 machine, refer to [Deploy a TiDB Cluster on ARM64 Machines](deploy-cluster-on-arm64.md).
```

>     kubectl -n tidb-cluster apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/examples/basic-cn/tidb-cluster.yaml

Reviewer 2: ditto

```

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Expected output</font></summary>

```
namespace/tidb-cluster created
tidbcluster.pingcap.com/basic created
```

</details>

If you need to deploy a TiDB cluster on ARM64 machines, refer to [Deploy a TiDB Cluster on ARM64 Machines](deploy-cluster-on-arm64.md).

### Deploy TiDB monitoring services

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
kubectl -n tidb-cluster apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb-operator/master/examples/basic/tidb-monitor.yaml
```

> If you have trouble accessing Docker Hub, you can try images hosted in UCloud:

Reviewer 2: ditto

Edition: Community
Git Commit Hash: cd8fb24c5f7ebd9d479ed228bb41848bd5e97445
Git Branch: heads/refs/tags/v5.2.1
UTC Build Time: 2021-09-08 02:32:56
GoVersion: go1.16.4
Race Enabled: false
TiKV Min Version: v3.0.0-60965b006877ca7234adaced7890d7b029ed1306
Check Table Before Drop: false
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Query the TiKV store status</font></summary>

```sql
mysql> select * from information_schema.tikv_store_status\G
*************************** 1. row ***************************
         STORE_ID: 4
          ADDRESS: basic-tikv-0.basic-tikv-peer.tidb-cluster.svc:20160
      STORE_STATE: 0
 STORE_STATE_NAME: Up
            LABEL: null
          VERSION: 4.0.0
         CAPACITY: 58.42GiB
        AVAILABLE: 36.18GiB
     LEADER_COUNT: 3
    LEADER_WEIGHT: 1
     LEADER_SCORE: 3
      LEADER_SIZE: 3
     REGION_COUNT: 21
    REGION_WEIGHT: 1
     REGION_SCORE: 21
      REGION_SIZE: 21
         START_TS: 2020-05-28 22:48:21
LAST_HEARTBEAT_TS: 2020-05-28 22:52:01
           UPTIME: 3m40.598302151s
1 rows in set (0.01 sec)
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Query the TiDB cluster information</font></summary>

> This command requires TiDB 4.0 or later versions. If you've deployed an earlier version, [upgrade the TiDB cluster](#step-5-upgrade-a-tidb-cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command is effective only in TiDB 4.0 or later versions. If your TiDB does not support the command, [upgrade the TiDB cluster](#step-5-upgrade-a-tidb-cluster).
```

```sql
mysql> select * from information_schema.cluster_info\G
*************************** 1. row ***************************
          TYPE: tidb
      INSTANCE: basic-tidb-0.basic-tidb-peer.tidb-cluster.svc:4000
STATUS_ADDRESS: basic-tidb-0.basic-tidb-peer.tidb-cluster.svc:10080

>        VERSION: 5.7.25-TiDB-v4.0.0

Reviewer: 中文版本是 5.2.1

Author: OK

      GIT_HASH: 689a6b6439ae7835947fcaccf329a3fc303986cb
    START_TIME: 2020-05-28T22:50:11Z
        UPTIME: 3m21.459090928s
*************************** 2. row ***************************
          TYPE: pd
      INSTANCE: basic-pd:2379
STATUS_ADDRESS: basic-pd:2379
       VERSION: 4.0.0
      GIT_HASH: 56d4c3d2237f5bf6fb11a794731ed1d95c8020c2
    START_TIME: 2020-05-28T22:45:04Z
        UPTIME: 8m28.459091915s
*************************** 3. row ***************************
          TYPE: tikv
      INSTANCE: basic-tikv-0.basic-tikv-peer.tidb-cluster.svc:20160
STATUS_ADDRESS: 0.0.0.0:20180

>        VERSION: 4.0.0

Reviewer: 中文版本是 5.2.1

      GIT_HASH: 198a2cea01734ce8f46d55a29708f123f9133944
    START_TIME: 2020-05-28T22:48:21Z
        UPTIME: 5m11.459102648s
3 rows in set (0.01 sec)
```

</details>

### Access Grafana dashboard

You can forward the port for Grafana to access Grafana dashboard locally:

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
kubectl port-forward -n tidb-cluster svc/basic-grafana 3000 > pf3000.out &
```

> You can access Grafana dashboard at <http://localhost:3000> on the host where you run `kubectl`. The default username and password in Grafana are both `admin`. Note that if you want to access Grafana dashboard at <http://localhost:3000> from your browser, you must run `kubectl` on the same host, not in a Docker container or on a remote host.

Reviewer: 原文是“如果你是非本机（比如 Docker 容器或远程服务器）上运行 `kubectl port-forward`，将无法在本地浏览器里通过 `localhost:3000` 访问”，虽然意思好像一样，但看看要不要改成跟中文一样呢？

Author: 我故意改成陈述句了，比否定句要好理解。这里没必要和中文那么严格保持一致。

For more information about monitoring the TiDB cluster in TiDB Operator, refer to [Deploy Monitoring and Alerts for a TiDB Cluster](monitor-a-tidb-cluster.md).

## Step 5. Upgrade a TiDB cluster

TiDB Operator also makes it easy to perform a rolling upgrade of the TiDB cluster. This section describes how to upgrade your TiDB cluster to the "nightly" release.

> Before that, you need to get familiar with a `kubectl` sub-command `kubectl patch`. It applies a specification change directly to the running cluster resources. There are several different patch strategies, each of which has various capabilities, limitations, and allowed formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before that, you need to get familiar with a `kubectl` sub-command `kubectl patch`. It applies a specification change directly to the running cluster resources. There are several different patch strategies, each of which has various capabilities, limitations, and allowed formats. For details, see [Kubernetes Patch](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/update-api-object-kubectl-patch/)
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```shell
kubectl patch tc basic -n tidb-cluster --type merge -p '{"spec": {"version": "nightly"} }'
```

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Expected output</font></summary>

```
tidbcluster.pingcap.com/basic patched
```

</details>

### Wait for Pods to restart

> To follow the progress of the cluster as its components are upgraded, run the following command. You should see some Pods transiting to `Terminating` and then back to `ContainerCreating` and then to `Running`. Pay attention to the value in the `AGE` pod column to see which pods have restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow the progress of the cluster as its components are upgraded, run the following command. You should see some Pods transiting to `Terminating` and then back to `ContainerCreating` and then to `Running`.
```

mysql --comments -h 127.0.0.1 -P 4000 -u root -e 'select tidb_version()\G'
```

<details>
<summary><font color=Blue>Expected output</font></summary>
Note that `nightly` is not a fixed version. Running the command above at different time might return different results.

```
*************************** 1. row ***************************
tidb_version(): Release Version: v5.4.0-alpha-445-g778e188fa
Edition: Community
Git Commit Hash: 778e188fa7af4f48497ff9e05ca6681bf9a5fa16
Git Branch: master
UTC Build Time: 2021-12-17 17:02:49
GoVersion: go1.16.4
Race Enabled: false
TiKV Min Version: v3.0.0-60965b006877ca7234adaced7890d7b029ed1306
Check Table Before Drop: false
```

</details>

## Step 6. Destroy the TiDB cluster and the Kubernetes cluster

After you finish testing, you can destroy the TiDB cluster and the Kubernetes cluster.

### Destroy the TiDB cluster

> This section introduces how to destroy the TiDB cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section introduces how to destroy a TiDB cluster.
```

The `tc` in this command is a short name for tidbclusters.

#### Delete TiDB monitoring services

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

```shell
kubectl delete tidbmonitor basic -n tidb-cluster
```

#### Delete PV data

> If your deployment has persistent data storage, deleting the TiDB cluster does not remove the data in the cluster. If you do not need the data, run the following commands to clean the data and the dynamically created persistent disks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your deployment has persistent data storage, deleting the TiDB cluster does not remove the data in the cluster. If you do not need the data, run the following commands to clean it:
```

kubectl get pv -l app.kubernetes.io/namespace=tidb-cluster,app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=tidb-operator,app.kubernetes.io/instance=basic -o name | xargs -I {} kubectl patch {} -p '{"spec":{"persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy":"Delete"}}'
```

#### Delete namespaces

> To make sure there are no lingering resources, delete the namespace used for your TiDB cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that there are no lingering resources, delete the namespace used for your TiDB cluster.
```

pgrep -lfa kubectl
```

### Destroy the Kubernetes cluster

The method of destroying a Kubernetes cluster depends on how you create it. Here are the steps for destroying a Kubernetes cluster.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="kind">

> If you use kind to create the Kubernetes cluster, run the following command to destroy it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To destroy a Kubernetes cluster created using kind, run the following command:
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
kind delete cluster
```

</div>

<div label="minikube">

> If you use minikube to create the Kubernetes cluster, run the following command to destroy it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To destroy a Kubernetes cluster created using minikube, run the following command:
```

{{< copyable "shell-regular" >}}

``` shell
minikube delete
```

</div>
</SimpleTab>

## See also

> If you want to do a production-grade deployment, refer to the following resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to deploy a TiDB cluster in production environments, refer to the following documents:
```
